# `libloadviz`

A library providing a visualization of the current system load, covering CPU
usage and RAM pressure.

Only CPU load is measured. RAM pressure has to be inferred:

- If the user part is high on one CPU, getting CPUs with better single core
  performance might help.

- If the user part is high on lots of CPUs, getting more cores might help.

- If the system part of the CPU load is high, this can mean that your system is
  swapping, and that getting more RAM might help.

## Input

`libloadviz` reads CPU load numbers. At least system, user and idle for all
logical cores. Polling is done about once per second.

## Output

![Screenshot generated using "cargo run --bin=screenshot" in the "libloadviz"
folder](screenshot.webp)

`libloadviz` exposes a `getImage()` function. `getImage()` takes `width` and
`height` as parameters, and returns an image.

## Why not measure RAM / swap usage?

People commonly think measuring RAM / swap usage will help them decide...

- When to close apps / tabs
- When to buy more RAM
- When to get faster swap

... but the truth is it won't help with any of that. Conclusions drawn from
those numbers will generally be wrong, and presenting them would just be
confusing.

### Swapping out unused memory

Let's say you have 8GB RAM, but you're using 25GB. 6GB is resident, 19GB is
swapped out and 2GB RAM is "free" / used as disk cache. Also, let's say that
only 4GB of RAM is actually needed right now, and the other 21GB just happen to
be around but are not going to be used during the near future.

Any RAM / Swap visualization would show this as critical because you're silly
high over quota.

But in reality, since you aren't using most of the memory, this is fine, no
action needed.

### Cost of swapping

Let's say you have two computers, both doing the same thing and having too little RAM.

One of them is swapping to a (slow) hard drive, and one to a (fast) SSD.

Then, even with the exact same memory numbers, the SSD machine will be in a lot
better situation than the HD machine.

How would you visualize this?

## Development

- `libloadviz.xcodeproj` was generated by <https://crates.io/crates/cargo-xcode>
  and is here only to enable calling this code from the macOS Swift app
- `cargo run --bin=printload` will print the current CPU load
- `cargo run --bin=screenshot` will write a screenshot into `screenshot.webp`

## Releasing a new version

Run `./release.sh` and follow instructions.

### Performance

Run benchmarks with `cargo bench`. Benchmarking docs here:
<https://bheisler.github.io/criterion.rs/book/criterion_rs.html>

On Johan's laptop, rendering an 100x100 image took 350µs. Doing that 10x per
second would take 3.5ms. One second has 1000ms, so the fraction here would be
$3.5\mathrm{ms} / 1000\mathrm{ms} = 0.35\%$.

Using 0.35% CPU for rendering sounds fine to me, so let's not do anything more
right now.
